CHAPTER XXXII.
And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the
mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said
unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us. For as for this
Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we want
not what has become of him. And Aaron said unto them, Break off the
golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons,
and of your daughters, and bring them unto me. And all the people
broke off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought
them unto Aaron. And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it
with a graving-tool, after he had made it a molten calf. And they
said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt. And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it, and
Aaron made proclamation, and said, Tomorrow is a feast to the Lord.
And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and
brought peace offerings. And the people sat down to eat and to drink,
and rose up to play.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down, for thy people which
thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves.
They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them.
They have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have
sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and behold, it
is a stiff-necked people. Now, therefore, let me alone that my wrath
may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them, and I will make
of thee a great nation.
And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why doth thy wrath
wax hot against thy people which thou hast brought forth out of the
land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand? Wherefore
should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them
out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face
of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil
against thy people. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants,
to whom thou swearst by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will
multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I
have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it
for ever.
And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his
people.
Then Moses turned and went down from the mount, and the two tables of
the testimony were in his hand. The tables were written on both their
sides, on the one side and on the other were they written. And the
tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God,
graven upon the tables. And when Joshua heard the noise of the people
as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the
camp. And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for
mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome,
but the noise of them that sing do I hear.
And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he
saw the calf and the dancing, and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast
the tables out of his hands and break them beneath the mount. And he
took the calf which they had made and burnt it in the fire and ground
it to powder and strawed it upon the water and made the children of
Israel drink of it.
And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee that thou
hast brought so great a sin upon them? And Aaron said, Let not the
anger of my Lord wax hot. Thou knowest the people that they are set
on mischief. For they said unto me, Make us gods which shall go
before us, for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of
the land of Egypt, we want not what has become of him. And I said
unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it off. So they
gave it me. Then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this
calf.
And when Moses saw that the people were naked, for Aaron had made
them naked unto their shame among their enemies, then Moses stood in
the cate of the camp and said, Who is on the Lord's side? Let him come
unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto
him. And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbor.
And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses, and
there fell of the people that day about three thousand men. For Moses
had said, Consecrate yourselves today to the Lord even every man
upon his son and upon his brother, that he may bestow upon you a
blessing this day.
And it came to pass on the morrow that Moses said unto the people, Ye
have sinned a great sin, and now I will go up unto the Lord. Per
adventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.
And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, O this people have sinned
a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. Yet now if thou wilt
forgive their sin, and if not blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book
which thou hast written.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him
will I blot out of my book. Therefore now go, lead the people unto
the place of which I have spoken unto thee. Behold, mine angel shall
go before thee. Nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit
their sin upon them.
And the Lord plagued the people, because they made the calf which
Aaron made.
Chapter 33
And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the
people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the
land which I swear unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, unto
thy seed will I give it. And I will send an angel before thee, and I
will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the
Perizzite, the Hibite, and the Jebusite, unto a land flowing with milk
and honey. For I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a
stiff-necked people, lest I consume thee in the way.
And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned, and no man
did put on him his ornaments. For the Lord had said unto Moses, Say unto
the children of Israel, Ye are a stiff-necked people, I will come up
into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee. Therefore now put
off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.
And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by
the Mount Horeb. And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without
the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the tabernacle of the
congregation. And it came to pass that every one which sought the Lord
went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the
camp. And it came to pass when Moses went out unto the tabernacle that
all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent-door, and looked
after Moses until he was gone into the tabernacle. And it came to pass
as Moses entered into the tabernacle the cloudy pillar descended and
stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses. And
all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door, and
all the people rose up and worshipped every man in his tent-door. And the
Lord spake unto Moses face to face as a man speaketh unto his friend.
And he turned again into the camp, but his servant Joshua, the son of
John, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.
And Moses said unto the Lord, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this
people, and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet
thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in
my sight. Now therefore I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight,
show me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in
thy sight, and consider that this nation is thy people. And he said,
My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. And he said
unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carryest not a pence. For
wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace
in thy sight? Is it not in that thou goest with us? So shall we be
separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face
of the earth. And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also
that thou hast spoken, for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I
know thee by name. And he said, I beseech thee, show me thy glory. And
he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will
proclaim the name of the Lord before thee, and will be gracious to whom
I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.
And he said, thou canst not see my face, for there shall no man see me
and live. And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou
shalt stand upon a rock, and it shall come to pass, while my glory
passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover
thee with my hand while I pass by, and I will take away mine hand, and
thou shalt see my back parts, but my face shall not be seen.
Chapter 34 And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two
tables of stone like unto the first, and I will write upon these
tables the words that were in the first tables which thou breakest. And
be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto Mount Sinai,
and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount. And no man
shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all
the mount, neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and Moses rose
up early in the morning, and went up unto Mount Sinai as the Lord had
commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone. And the
Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed
the name of the Lord. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed,
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the
guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and
the children's children unto the third and to the fourth generation.
And Moses made haste and bowed his head toward the earth and worshipped,
and he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my
Lord, I pray thee, go among us, for it is a stiff-necked people, and
pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.
And he said, Behold, I make a covenant, before all thy people I will do
marvels such as have not been done in all the earth nor in any nation,
and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the Lord,
for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee. Observe thou that
which I command thee this day, behold, I drive out before thee the
the Samarite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite,
and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants
of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of
thee. But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut
down their groves, for thou shalt worship no other God, for the Lord
whose name is Jealous is a Jealous God, lest thou make a covenant with
the inhabitants of the land, and they go a-whoring after their gods,
and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat his
sacrifice, and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their
daughters go a-whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a-whoring
after their gods. Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.
The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat
unleavened bread, as I commanded thee in the time of the month Abib,
for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt. All that openeth the
matrix is mine, and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or
sheep, that is male. But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with
a lamb, and if thou redeem him not, then thou shalt break his neck. All
the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem, and none shall appear
before me empty. Six days thou shalt labor, but on the seventh day
thou shalt rest, in earring-time and in harvest thou shalt rest. And
thou shalt observe the feast of weeks of the firstfruits of wheat
harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end. Thrice in the
year shall all your men-children appear before the Lord God, the God
of Israel. For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge
thy borders. Neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go
up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year. Thou shalt not
offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven. Neither shall the sacrifice
of the feast of the Passover be left unto the morning. The first of the
firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the Lord thy
God. Thou shalt not see the kid in his mother's milk.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words, for after the
tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.
And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights. He did
neither eat bread nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the
words of the covenant the Ten Commandments. And it came to pass when
Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in
Moses's hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses whist not
that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him. And when
Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of
his face shone, and they were afraid to come nigh him. And Moses
called unto them, and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation
returned unto him, and Moses talked with them. And afterward all the
children of Israel came nigh, and he gave them in commandment all that
the Lord had spoken with him in Mount Sinai. Until Moses had done
speaking with them, he put a veil on his face. But when Moses went in
for the Lord to speak with him, he took the veil off until he came
out. And he came out and spake unto the children of Israel that which
he was commanded. And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses
that the skin of Moses's face shone. And Moses put the veil upon his
face again until he went in to speak with him.
CHAPTER 35
And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel
together, and said unto them, These are the words which the Lord hath
commanded that ye should do them. Six days shall work be done, but on
the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a Sabbath of rest
to the Lord. Whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death. Ye
shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath day.
And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel,
saying, This is the thing which the Lord commanded, saying, Take ye from
among you an offering unto the Lord. Whosoever is of a willing heart,
let him bring it, an offering of the Lord. Gold and silver and brass
and blue and purple and scarlet and fine linen and goat's hair and
ram's skins dyed red and badger's skins and shittim wood and oil for
light and spices for anointing oil and for the sweet incense and onyx
stones and stones to be set for the ephod and for the breastplate. And
every wise heart that among you shall come and make all that the Lord
hath commanded, the tabernacle, his tent and his covering, his tashes
and his boards, his bars, his pillars and his sockets, the ark and the
staves thereof with the mercy seat and the veil of the covering, the
table and his staves and all his vessels and the showbread, the
candlestick also for the light and his furniture and his lamps with
the oil for the light, and the incense altar and his staves and the
anointing oil and the sweet incense and the hanging for the door at the
entering inn of the tabernacle, the altar of burnt offering with his
and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, the hangings for the
court, his pillars and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of
the court, the pins of the tabernacle and the pins of the court and
their cords, the cloths of service to do service in the holy place, the
holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments of his sons to
minister in the priest's office.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the
presence of Moses. And they came, every one whose heart stirred him
up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the
Lord's offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation and
for all his service and for the holy garments. And they came, both men
and women, as many as were willing-hearted, and brought bracelets and
earrings and rings and tablets, all jewels of gold, and every man that
offered offered an offering of gold unto the Lord. And every man with
whom was found blue and purple and scarlet and fine linen and goats'
hair and red skins of rams and badger's skins brought them. Everyone
that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the Lord's
offering, and every man with whom was found shittim wood for any work
of the service brought it. And all the women that were wise-hearted
did spin with their hands and brought that which they had spun, both
of blue and of purple and of scarlet and of fine linen. And all the
women whose hearts stirred them up in wisdom spun goats' hair. And the
rulers brought onyx stones and stones to be set for the ephod and for
the breastplate, and spice and oil for the light and for the anointing
oil, and for the sweet incense. The children of Israel brought a
willing offering unto the Lord, every man and woman whose heart made
them willing to bring for all manner of work which the Lord had
commanded to be made by the hand of Moses.
And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the Lord hath called
by name Bezalel the son of Uriah the son of Her of the tribe of Judah,
and he hath filled him with the Spirit of God in wisdom, in understanding
and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, and to devise
curious works, to work in gold and in silver and in brass, and in the
cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any
manner of cunning work. And he hath put in his heart that he may teach
both he and Aholiab the son of Hisamach of the tribe of Dan. Them hath
he filled with wisdom of heart to work all manner of work, of the
engraver and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, and blue
and in purple, and in scarlet and in fine linen, and of the weaver,
even of them that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work.
The Lord hath called by name Bezalel the son of Her of the tribe of Judah,